(ethereal music)
All right, let's talk about styles in CSS.
So now that we've got this layout here,
you might be thinking, okay, where's styles?
No problem, pop a link tag in there, give it a relative path
to my CSS file and we'll call it a day.
However, that would actually work,
but it goes against the idea of Gatsby, in that Gatsby needs
to know about everything in your project.
It needs to know about your data, your images,
your pages, your links,
and it needs to know about your CSS, why?
Because like, I don't know, if we go to wesbos.com
and we were to view Page Source here,
you'll see that all of the CSS that is being dumped
in here is being dumped before any of the content.
And that's because Gatsby has figured out what CSS
that I've written for this website is necessary
is what's called the Critical CSS
in order for that page to render
without having a big sort of a flash of unstyled text.
So instead of just linking to it like this,
because that goes outside of Gatsby,
we need to import it through Gatsby.
Now, there's a whole bunch of different ways
that you can do CSS in Gatsby.
And we are eventually going to just land
on using styled-components.
But I'm gonna show you just a couple of ways
that you could do it.
So, certainly, you could go into your styles folder,
and let's just make like a red.css.
And inside of that, let's just say,
body is background is red.
Then what you can do is you go into your gatsby-browser.js
and simply just import that right in.
So, we just say import, what is it?
It's in our source folder, that's in our styles folder,
and then it's red.css.
Give that a save.
And now we go to this page.
The background is obviously red.
And what's important about that is that Gatsby will know
that this is necessary in order to make that first render
and it will stick it.
If you view Page Source on this, you're not gonna see it.
And that's because we're in development mode.
But if you were to run a Gatsby build
which we will be doing in just a bit, you would see that
it would stick that into a style tag right on the page.
So that's one way.
Another way is Gatsby in the docs, they show you
how to use this CSS modules,
which I'll let you go into the docs and read it.
I don't need another tutorial saying exactly
what is in the documentation.
It's not my favorite.
I feel like it's like a little bit clunky.
One thing I like to use is called styled-components.
And this is just a way to do scope CSS
inside of React application.
And I actually use it in my own personal website
and a lot of my other courses.
And I'm a big fan of it.
So that is to say, I don't actually use a whole lot
of the special styled-component stuff,
I use it mostly for the ability to scope my CSS
and make reusable styled-components.
So the first thing that we need to do is
to set some global styles in our application.
And the second thing we're gonna do
is to create some typography styles
and then we'll get into writing the CSS
throughout the entire course.
And usually in my courses, I don't include writing all
of the CSS just because it would take forever,
but in this course, part of it,
I'm just gonna tell you to go grab it.
And then other parts that are interesting
in terms of like neat layout, tricks, and whatnot,
I'm gonna code it with you.
And if you're totally not interested in writing CSS with me,
you can just go grab it from the finished-file.
So what we need to do first is to set up some
of our global styles, because on any website,
oh, I got to get rid of this red.css, it's too much.
I already did, did I?
Gatsby-browser. No, I didn't.
All right, well, what was I saying?
On any website, you're gonna have global styles,
things like what color is the background?
What are the different fonts?
What do buttons look like?
What do the scroll bars look like?
Is there any max-width on the images?
There's a whole bunch of stuff that you want,
sorta just globally applied on your website.
So global styles, what are things?
If we take a look at this website,
we've got this kind of background pattern here,
we've got the specific black, that specific yellow,
that specific red, things like, if we go to them,
if we see text, how big is that text,
things like how big are the images at their maximum.
Those are all things that need
to be in our global styles initially,
because it doesn't make a lot of sense to have
to reset those every single time that we make a component.
And if you're not sure what a scope style is,
it'll make a whole lot of sense when we start to make it.
So, first thing we need to do
is just reset our entire application,
because by default, all the browsers have a bit
of a different baseline.
And a package that I use
to just reset everything is called normalize.css.
I guess the reset is not a good word,
it normalizes all of the browsers so that you're starting
with the exact same foundation on every single one.
So, simply just go into your Layout.js, and at the top,
we're just gonna import 'normalize.css'.
And you're gonna say to yourself, like, look,
if I comment that out,
you see how there's like this itty-bitty,
tiny little border around.
I think it's the HTML lets the body.
So, if I hover over the body,
there's like a random margin around the body,
like what's the point of that?
So by including normalize.css, you see how that goes away.
And now if I were to inspect my body,
you'll see it applies a margin zero.
So just little things like that.
Nice little base importing.
And you might say like,
"Wes, I don't see that CSS file anywhere.
"Like where is normalize.css?"
And it's actually a package.
If you open package JSON, you'll see it,
in here that I've installed it for you.
And it's actually just including the package,
which in turn will give you the CSS.
All right, next, what we need to do
is to make some global style.
So let's go into our styles directory here
and let's create a file called GlobalStyles.js.
It's not CSS in this case.
And that's because we're
using a package called styled-components, which allows us
to create reusable styles over and over again.
So, inside of this global styles,
I'm actually gonna just gonna get you to copy
and paste it from the finished-files, why?
Because it's not all that interesting.
It's just a some boilerplate for the stuff.
That's a lot more interesting
in terms of like how we lay this stuff out.
I'll go through that with you.
So go to the finished-files that we have here
in our Gatsby folder and then in our source folder,
in our styles folder, and then find your global styles.
Instead of just copy pasting it here,
I just like to click Raw, copy, and then paste it into here.
So let's go through what's going on in here.
So, we've got our createGlobalStyle.
This is a function from our styled-components library,
which is something that I've installed for you.
Then, this is kind of interesting.
So you don't see this really all that often.
Like, I'm importing SVGs inside of JavaScript.
And like over here, you're importing CSS
inside of JavaScript.
Like I'm pretty sure that's not valid JavaScript.
And it's not.
It's not valid JavaScript, but because the way
that Gatsby works is that Gatsby allows you
to import anything, including images in CSS,
and then Gatsby knows not to actually render that out
to JavaScript, but it knows to render that out to CSS
or to a compressed image or something like that.
So I'm importing these right here.
And the reason I'm not just sticking them
in my assets folder and referencing from there is because
if I were just to reference them in here,
then that would have to go in the static folder,
and Gatsby doesn't know about it.
So I'll show you what this renders out to
in just a quick second.
Then I have some variables.
So these are just regular old CSS variables
or they're called custom properties.
And the reason why I put them on the root
is so that they are available anywhere I want
through the application.
So I use this red, black, yellow pretty frequently.
Then we have our base styles for HTML and our body.
I have some base styles for fieldsets.
Some base styles for all of our buttons in here.
Some people like to create reusable buttons
over and over again, but I just like to use a regular button
and style it the same way for the entire application.
This, right here, is how I select the Gatsby images
before they are fully rendered.
So, if we take a look at this right here and I refresh,
actually, no, that's a bad example.
If we go to the pizza, so there we go,
you see that the pizza's, right here,
what Gatsby actually does under the hood,
I take a drink every time I say under the hood
in this course.
I'm sorry if I overuse it.
Gatsby actually renders out their images
with all kinds of really neat things.
They render out image with multiple formats.
So this is WebP.
This is a format that works in, I think,
Chrome, Firefox, not Safari.
I don't know, it works in some browsers, not all of them,
but it will fall back to other versions if it doesn't.
And then it also ships multiple sizes of that image.
So based on the size of the user's device,
it will load larger or smaller versions,
which is really cool.
And then one more neat thing that it does
is when you load up the image for the first time
before any of these images have finished downloading
from the server, it actually just renders
out this Base64 string.
And this is really cool because instead of having
to wait for a small thumbnail version,
it just ships that image as text
in something called Base64.
So if I were to copy this and paste this Base64 in here,
this is a pizza with pear on it.
That's a bit odd, pear and potato, but that image is,
if you were just to paste that into your browser,
I think, yeah, look, look, it's tiny.
It's 20 by 20 pixels.
Absolutely tiny, but the idea is that you can blur,
you can scale up that image really large and blur it.
And inside of this mumble jumble, somewhere like BAAMBAAA,
that means pear.
And MUFBA, that means sweet potato.
And all of these letters mean something.
And if you were just to change one
of these letters like the F to A,
it would sorta somewhere in that pizza,
that the thing changed.
So, when we load it really quickly,
it's actually just scaling it up.
And then I've applied a image-rendering pixelated to it,
just to give it a cool little fade in effect.
If you don't like that, you can take it off.
This is the scrollbar styles
to get it to work cross browser.
This is styling of all of my HRs.
And then this just puts a max-width of 100%
on all of my images so they don't overflow.
So, pretty basic styles.
Now, in order to use these global styles,
we stick them in a variable.
And then I exported them from this file.
And then we need to inject them
into our application somewhere.
So, at a high level, I'm gonna inject it into our layout.
And I'm just gonna go in here and write my global styles.
And then I'm gonna use my handy-dandy import trick
to import GlobalStyles from the actual relative path
where it lives.
Now, if we go to our application, we should be able
to see that it's starting to look a little bit different.
Good, so you see the background
of my body tag now has that cool pattern on it.
And if we make this a little bit bigger
and get into inspecting our, where is it?
It's on the HTML.
You'll see that the background image is not equal
to this is the background image
with the cheese and everything, it's not equal to bg.svg.
It's equal to bg-386111, whatever.
And that's because Gatsby took that SVG,
put it through its compressor or anything else
that it needs to do and puts a unique identifier on it.
And what's cool about that is that
if you ever change your BG, Gatsby will know,
and it'll put a different random identifier on it.
And then you never have the issue where you have
to tell people to do a hard refresh,
because it's literally a different file name
and it won't be cashed in there.
So, which is pretty nifty.
So that's it for global styles.
If you ever have something you want globally,
you just pop it in this file.
Next, I'm gonna do a little bit more global styles,
but I have my own file that's just related to topography.